Following the police discovery,
Shanur’s family went
to the spot where he was found.
They discovered his glasses
and blood stained tissue
from the family home.
I saw my son’s Versace
glasses there, and I was
shocked, what police did.
Police say they are
looking for evidence.
They took so much time
to get the evidence,
why my son’s sunglasses there?
The Met police have yet to respond
to the family’s claims.
So far, no arrests have been made.
Police are appealing for anyone
with information to come forward.
Meanwhile, Shanur’s family
pray his killers are found
and brought to justice.
Ayshea Buksh, BBC
London, Manor Park.
That’s it from us on BBC One.
But we keep going on BBC
London Facebook, Twitter
and on BBC Radio London.
Dojoin us there.
Now the weather from Chris.
Have a very good night, goodbye.
It turned out to be a miserable day,
what with all the cloud,
cold wind and of course the rain
which lasted pretty much all day.
Things get quieter overnight,
clear spells working their way
down from the north,
rainy clearing off.
It is going to be
a cold night, though.
Temperatures getting close
to freezing and there
could be a mist orfog patch
in the countryside with these low
temperatures, so a chilly start
to the day on Friday but a much
more straightforward day.
Sunshine to start off with.
The afternoon, a bit
of cloud bubbles up,
the odd isolated shower,
but for most of us it stays dry
throughout with spells of sunshine,
highs up to 11 degrees.
The weekend weather prospects —
Saturday looks like a windy day,
cloud increasing through the day.
Sunday, rain to start off with,
but it should get brighter later on.
Now Louise with the national
weather forecast.
Good evening. Thursday, well, lovely
for some, but not for others. In
fact we had close to nine hours of
sunshine across northern England but
further south it was cloudy, it was
wet and, quite frankly, it was cold
as well. We had over an inch and a
half of rain as it clears away now
into the near continent. Winds are
into the near continent. winds are
falling light,
into the near continent. Winds are
falling light, skies are clearing
out temperatures are falling away so
tomorrow morning is going to be a
cold, possibly frosty start for
some, with some early morning mist
some, with some earty morning mist
and fog patches.
some, with some early morning mist
and fog patches. The exception the
far south—east along with Northern
far south-east along with Northern
Ireland,
far south—east along with Northern
Ireland, here are a few scattered
showers in the morning and some of
these becoming more widespread as we
go through the afternoon,
particularly into western Scotland.
particularty into western Scotland.
But for
particularly into western Scotland.
But for many, a quieter day with
sunny spells continuing on for some
it will feel a little warmer, 7—11d
it will feel a little warmer, 7-11d
the high. As we
it will feel a little warmer, 7—11d
the high. As we move out on Friday
to the start of the weekend that
winds once again are going to become
quite a feature of the story and,
yes, there will be some rain at
times. But I really want to
emphasise that weekend is not a
wash—out
wash-out by
emphasise that weekend is not a
wash—out by any means. For many on
wash-out by any means. For many on
Saturday there
wash—out by any means. For many on
Saturday there will be a good deal
of triumph not cloudy conditions.
Rain arriving into western Scotland,
Northern Ireland and north—west
Northern Ireland and north-west
England and
Northern Ireland and north—west
England and the wind strengthening,
gusting to gale force. Temperature
gusting to gala force. Temperature
7-11d. It’s
gusting to gale force. Temperature
7-11d. It’s this
7—11d. It’s this rain and strong
7-11d. It’s this rain and strong
winds
7—11d. It’s this rain and strong
winds that will sweep steadily south
and east overnight Saturday into
Sunday, so the rain will clear away.
It stays blustery with some squally
showers for many on Sunday. Whatever
you are doing this weekend, have
Want to escape to new worlds
this weekend?
I don’t know and I don’t care.
We’ve got you sorted.
Right, let’s get to it.
You should leave now
while you still can.
I am very pleased.
The game is on!
Ten unlikely travellers...
16 countries...
Go!
What have we got ourselves into?
This is no holiday,
it’s the adventure of a lifetime.
Best mode of transport ever!
I don’t know
if this is terrifying or fun.
It’s like therre putting on a show
just for us.
Probably should have gone
to the toilet before starting.
Brand—new:
Tonight, we are in Tunbridge Wells.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight plasma panel, Matt
Hancock, appointed Health Secretary
nearty two
nearly two years ago by Theresa May,
nearty two years ago by Theresa May,
kept in the job
nearly two years ago by Theresa May,
kept in thejob by
kept in the job by Boris
nearly two years ago by Theresa May,
kept in the job by Borisjohnson.
kept in thejob by Borisjohnson. He
kept in the job by Boris johnson. He
now faces
kept in thejob by Borisjohnson. He
now faces one of the biggest
challenges for his department, the
Government and the country. Former
Foreign Secretary and deputy leader
of the Labour Party and an MP since
of the labour Party and an MP since
1974, Margaret
of the Labour Party and an MP since
1974, Margaret Beckett. Layla Moran,
education spokesperson for the
Liberal Democrats, rumoured to be a
candidate for the leadership of the
randidate for the leadership of the
party-
candidate for the leadership of the
party. Tim Stanley, journalist,
broadcaster and columnist for the
Daily Telegraph stop doctor, writer
Daily Telagraph stop doctor, writer
and TV
Daily Telegraph stop doctor, writer
and TV presenter on numerous health
programmes including CBBC’s
programmes including (3505
operation
programmes including CBBC’s
operation ouch, Xand van Tulleken.
APPLAUSE
Welcome to our panel, to the
audience here and of course, to you
at home. Remember, you can
at home. Remember, you canjoin in
at home. Remember, you ranjoin in
with the
at home. Remember, you canjoin in
with the usual
with the usualfashion
at home. Remember, you canjoin in
with the usual fashion on social
media. It is pretty obvious, I
think, to all of us here and to you
at home that there is one big
subject dominating the conversation
at the moment and having seen all
the questions that you had submitted
here, there is no doubt the
coronavirus and its impact is what
peopla here
people here want to talk about. So
peopla here want to talk about. So
we’re going to
people here want to talk about. So
we’re going to do things just a
little differently this evening. We
have the Health Secretary with us.
We are pleased to have you here. We
are going take some 0 and a
questions,
are going take some 0 and 3
questions, quickfire, to hear the
concerns of you here. We will do the
politic and
politics and challenges to the
Government, you won’t get of quite
that easily. But a general question
about coronavirus Jill
about coronavirusjill Pullin. How
concerned about coronavirus should
we be? Cleariy
we be? Clearly coronavirus is a huge
we be? Cleariy coronavirus is a huge
challenge to the
we be? Clearly coronavirus is a huge
challenge to the country. On behalf
of everyone, I want to send our
deepest condolences to the family
and the loved ones of the patient
who died today with coronavirus. I’m
sure that will be a worrying moment
for lots of people and
understandably so. And I
understandably so. And Ifeel the
responsibility deeply for getting
the Government response to this
right. The Government are the only
people who need to respond —— not
people who need to respond -- not
the only people
people who need to respond —— not
the only people that need to
respond, we can all play a part in
respond, we ran all play a part in
it. It is a
respond, we can all play a part in
it. It is a perfectly reasonable for
it. It is a perfectly reasonabla for
peopla to be
it. It is a perfectly reasonable for
people to be worried. Of course, for
peopla to be worried. Of course, for
the majority of
people to be worried. Of course, for
the majority of people, if they
the majority of peopla, if they
catch
the majority of people, if they
catch coronavirus, then it will be a
catch coronavims, then it will be a
mild, relatively
catch coronavirus, then it will be a
mild, relatively mild disease and
the vast majority will fully
recover. And so from that point of
view, for most people, this will be
view, for most peopla, this will be
something akin
view, for most people, this will be
something akin to getting the flu if
something akin to getting the ﬂu if
they get it.
something akin to getting the flu if
they get it. But obviously it is
also having some very significant
effects, both on the economy, in
terms of people... How they manage
their daily lives. And for a small
proportion of people, we estimate
around 1% of those who catch it,
around 196 of those who match it,
then it is
around 1% of those who catch it,
then it is fatal. So it is a very
serious consideration. The thing
that makes it more difficult is that
there is a virus, this disease is
new. That means that none of us have
the natural antibodies that we have
to something like the flu. So it’s a
to something like the ﬂu. So it’s a
serious
to something like the flu. So it’s a
serious problem for the country and
all of us need to play our part and
ran play our
can play our part in making sure we
ran play our part in making sure we
as a country, and
can play our part in making sure we
as a country, and as a world,
respond as well as we possibly can.
respond as well as we possibly ran.
(“an I ask,
respond as well as we possibly can.
Can I ask, how worried are you? I’m
(“an I ask, how worried are you? I’m
not personally
Can I ask, how worried are you? I’m
not personally particularly worried
because I feel I don’t fall into the
category where I should be majorly
category where I should be majorty
concerned,
category where I should be majorly
concerned, from what I have read. It
will be, for the majority of us,
severe cold or flu—like symptoms.
severe cold or ﬂu-like symptoms.
Yet a lot
severe cold or flu—like symptoms.
Yet a lot of what you read implies
we should almost be barricading the
we should almost be barriading the
door is. OK,
we should almost be barricading the
door is. 0K, 0K, we will get into
more specific things in a moment.
Xand van Tulleken, how is afraid
should we be? I think it is such a
good question because everyone I
know is wondering how to react to
the news we are getting. The first
death today, 100 cases, how serious
is it? I
is it? Iguess
death today, 100 cases, how serious
is it? Iguessl
is it? I guess I would say there is
an urgency and the fact that it is
dominating the headlines is because
every single person in the UK should
be changing their behaviour today.
The most important thing is hand
washing. Hand washing will not
reduce your chances of catching it
to zero but will dramatically slow
the spread. Slowing the spread is
very urgent because the number of
rases
cases doubles every few days. A few
days ago we had 40—50 cases, now we
days ago we had 40-50 cases, now we
have 100, in a
days ago we had 40—50 cases, now we
have 100, in a few days’ time we
have 100, in a few days“ time we
will have
have 100, in a few days’ time we
will have 200 and that doubling may
well keep going. As it doubles, as
Matt said, a small proportion of
those people, not necessarily the
small proportion that die back 5% or
small proportion that die back 596 or
101: will.
small proportion that die back 5% or
10% will need intensive care or at
1096 will need intensive rare or at
least a high
10% will need intensive care or at
least a high dependency unit. Those
beds are in short supply at the
moment in the NHS, as they always
are. So the more we can spread
are. So the more we ran spread
things out, the
are. So the more we can spread
things out, the more likely it is we
ran provide rare
can provide care to everyone that
ran provide rare to everyone that
needs
can provide care to everyone that
needs and keep mortality as low as
low as possible. That is the
urgency. Everyone should be
invested. There are other things you
ran do. You
can do. You should be hygienic in
ran do. You should be hygienic in
terms of
can do. You should be hygienic in
terms of catching and killing
sneezes and coughs, wiping surfaces.
I think everyone should be
self—monitoring. If you are
concerned, even more normal avoid or
infecting other people. Matt and I
infecting other peopla. Matt and I
properly
infecting other people. Matt and I
properly don’t disagree with theirs,
property don’t disagree with theirs,
I think
properly don’t disagree with theirs,
I think the Government has been very
sensible at providing good quality
evidence—based information.
Personally, I like not handshaking.
Not because it may not stop the
spread but it makes you think when
you walk into a room, we’ll
you walk into a room, we’lljust met
you walk into a room, we’ll just met
backstage and I
you walk into a room, we’lljust met
backstage and I wouldn’t shake
anyone because my hand and it made
it intensely awkward as everyone was
suddenly talking about coronavirus.
I like that. Then you get out the
alcohol gel and think about it. You
ran do air
can do air kisses, you can do a
ran do air kisses, you ran do a
little hug, a
can do air kisses, you can do a
little hug, a bow wave, and knuckle
bump, however
bump, howeveryou
little hug, a bow wave, and knuckle
bump, however you want to greet
people. I
people. Ilike
bump, however you want to greet
people. I like an elbow bump but all
peopla. I like an elbow bump but all
that
people. I like an elbow bump but all
that makes people conscious of
hygiene. Everyone should be
invested, no one shall panic. And
you will be demonstrating those
things later, Xand! Margaret, how
worried should we be? I don’t think
we should be afraid but I think we
should be wary and cautious and look
for sound information. One of the
things that strikes me forcibly is
that this is going to illuminate all
the problems we’ve already got in
the problams we’ve already got in
our
the problems we’ve already got in
our health service, which we know it
is underfunded and all those things.
And it will bring a lot of that
time. So I think this is going to
be, apart from anything is, a period
where peopla
where people can learn about each
where people ran learn about each
other, about
where people can learn about each
other, about what the country’s
other, about what the countrrs
problams
other, about what the country’s
problems are, what we need to
resolve them and that I think in
itself will be important. 50 I don’t
itself will be important. So I don’t
think we
itself will be important. 50 I don’t
think we should go about in fear and
dread but I don’t think we ought to
be silly, either. Tim? I noticed all
the loo roll
the [00 roll has gone in my
be silly, either. Tim? I noticed all
the loo roll has gone in my local
the loo roll has gone in my [oral
supermarket,
the [00 roll has gone in my local
supermarket, and so is the hand gel
as well. I don’t know why people
as well. I don’t know why peopla
have gone for
as well. I don’t know why people
have gone for the loo roll, I don’t
want to
have gone for the [00 roll, I don’t
want to know! I can’t think for love
nor money. I think the Government is
getting it about right, walking a
fine line between getting people
ready and getting people conscious
ready and getting peopla conscious
of
ready and getting people conscious
of the way they are behaving but
also not causing too much alarm
because there is always a risk you
generate so much alarm, that that
actually does more damage than the
virus itself, at least economically.
We don’t want our way of life to be
changed forever. That is always what
one is conscious about trying to
avoid. I want to be able to go back
to shaking hands. I’m not going to
walk around doing that all day. I
want things to go back to normal as
soon as possible and therefore any
short—term inconvenience we have to
short-term inconvenience we have to
accept, fair
short—term inconvenience we have to
accept, fair enough. The goal is to
keep ralm, tarry
keep calm, carry on, not get
hysterical, because that’s kind of
what defines Britain. Layla Moran? I
what defines Britain. layla Moran? I
think like you,
what defines Britain. Layla Moran? I
think like you, for myself I’m not
actually that worried. I’m young and
healthy and that I get it there is a
very good chance I will be OK. But I
am worried for particularly my
am worried for particularty my
elderty
am worried for particularly my
elderly grandparents, people who are
elderty grandparents, peopla who are
more
elderly grandparents, people who are
more vulnerable. People who perhaps
don’t have the same resilience
financially as I do. I’ve been doing
a lot of work in the last few days,
writing to Matt about statutory sick
PaY-
pay, thinking of those who have
writing to Matt about statutory sick
pay, thinking of those who havejobs
pay, thinking of those who have jobs
on
pay, thinking of those who havejobs
on zero—hours contract and the gig
on zero-hours contract and the gig
economy, who
on zero—hours contract and the gig
economy, who have to think hard
about do I go to work today or do I
do the right thing for other people,
do the right thing for other peopla,
which is
do the right thing for other people,
which is to self—isolate if they
which is to self-isolate if they
have no
which is to self—isolate if they
have no symptoms and they have been
in contact with someone. All credit
to the Government, they have been
listening and they have now changed
those rules. 50 we are trying to all
those mles. So we are trying to all
work together
those rules. 50 we are trying to all
work together on this. I think that
is really important, that
politicians at a time like this do
our
ourjobs and talk about the most
vulnerable constituents that we
have. The other people I really do
have. The other peopla I really do
worry about
have. The other people I really do
worry about are people like the
homeless. I was talking to people in
the sector today who are concerned,
and I say this talking to Matt, they
haven’t had guidance about what to
do for peopla,
do for people, particularly rough
do for people, particularty rough
sleepers.
do for people, particularly rough
sleepers. You have to think, if you
don’t have a home, how do you
self—isolate? I can see you are
self-isolate? I ran see you are
writing that
self—isolate? I can see you are
writing that damn, I hope you take
that back. At a time like this, we
perform a really important
perform a really importantjob,
which is to ask the right questions
on behalf of the people that we
serve and the job of the Government
I think it’s to respond and listen.
0K. There is a lot of very practical
questions that many of you have
asked. I will do a kind of for want
asked. I will do a kind offor want
of a better
asked. I will do a kind of for want
of a better phrase, a quickfire
round to you, Matt, if I may. A
round to you, Matt, ifI may. A
quick question
round to you, Matt, if I may. A
quick question and a reasonably
brief answer. I want to get in as
many as I ran,
many as I can,Jim
brief answer. I want to get in as
many as I can, Jim Docherty? With
many as I ran, jim Docherty? with
the first
many as I can, Jim Docherty? With
the first death today, should we now
be preventing large gatherings at
sport events and theatres? We are
looking into the exact science of
what the approach should be as the
numbers grow. We are still in the
phase where we are trying to contain
this virus, but also exactly as Xand
said, delaying the onset has a big
benefit, in terms of the impact on
the NHS. Actually, the more we look
at the science of this particular
virus, the more it is clear that the
large-scale
large—scale events are not
necessarily as big spreaders as a
lot of people think. The reason for
lot of peopla think. The reason for
that is the way
lot of people think. The reason for
that is the way that this virus
transmit is through... It’s
respiratory, so close proximity. So
if you are outdoors and you have the
virus, then you would still only be
affecting the people near to you. So
the most important thing is to get
the message that people that have
the virus and have the symptoms need
to self—isolate. So following the
to self-isolate. So following the
science
to self—isolate. 50 following the
science is absolutely at the heart
of the Government’s response. If I
just also respond to the point from
layla,
Layla, complete entry about how the
Government is responding. Cross
party in government, I have never
seen the Government come together
like this, to find the right
scientific response to this crisis
and try to bring the country
together. Another question from
Thomas? How will the Government
support those who self—isolate due
support those who self-isolate due
to
support those who self—isolate due
to coronavirus who aren’t entitled
to coronavirus who aren’t entiﬂad
to statutory
to coronavirus who aren’t entitled
to statutory sick pay, like those on
zero—hours contracts? It’s an
zero-hours contracts? It’s an
incredibly
zero—hours contracts? It’s an
incredibly important question and we
have said that people should not be
have said that peopla should not be
penalised for
have said that people should not be
penalised for doing the right thing.
So we will change the rules on
So we will change the mles on
statutory
So we will change the rules on
statutory sick pay but we are also
working on making sure that people
working on making sure that peopla
who are say
working on making sure that people
who are say self—employed or in an
who are say self-employed or in an
employment
who are say self—employed or in an
employment contract that doesn’t
allow them to get statutory sick pay
because they don’t earn the minimum
amount, maybe because they don’t
work full—time, to make sure that
work full-time, to make sure that
they get the
work full—time, to make sure that
they get the support they need as
well. Financial
well. Financialsupport
they get the support they need as
well. Financial support from the
Government? Yes. If we as government
are asking people to self—isolate,
are asking peopla to self-isolate,
then they
are asking people to self—isolate,
then they shouldn’t be penalised for
doing the right thing, which is good
for them but good for the whole
for them but good for the whola
community.
for them but good for the whole
community. When can we expect an
announcement on that? The Prime
Minister made the announcement
yesterday in broad terms and I’m
working with the DWP secretary in
the Business Secretary to get the
exact rules of that right and then
exact mles of that right and then
they will go
exact rules of that right and then
they will go through Parliament.
Andrew Flintoff? If I get
coronavirus, how should I
self—isolate from my family? Another
self-isolate from my family? Another
important
self—isolate from my family? Another
important question. People should
try to self—isolate from their
families. 50 not only go home, try
families. So not only go home, try
not to go out for
families. 50 not only go home, try
not to go out for instance shopping,
definitely don’t use public
transport. But within your home, you
should also try to isolate. Look,
I’m a father of three children, I
understand that that can be
difficult and some people have
difficult and some peopla have
raring
difficult and some people have
caring responsibilities. But as much
raring responsibilities. But as much
as possible,
caring responsibilities. But as much
as possible, stay on your own, even
within your own home. So practical
things like sharing a bathroom, 3
things like sharing a bathroom, a
kitchen?
things like sharing a bathroom, 3
kitchen? So long as you wash your
hands and wipe down surfaces that
you use, you can take these
you use, you ran take these
precautions.
you use, you can take these
precautions. Obviously, there are
practicalities but the strong advice
is to come you possibly can, even
is to come you possibly ran, even
within your own
is to come you possibly can, even
within your own home if you are self
isolating, keep yourself to
yourself. 0K, Nicola? The media seem
to help create panic buying. How do
we stop causing shortages caused by
we stop causing shortages raused by
this?
we stop causing shortages caused by
this? We have already heard about
the loo
the [00 roll! There is
this? We have already heard about
the loo roll! There is absolutely no
need for individuals to go around
buying more than they need. In fact,
part of the response to this has to
be is coming together. We are after
all I heard,
alll heard, it
be is coming together. We are after
all I heard, it is biology that is
causing the problem. And so the
very, very strong advice from the
scientists, from the medic says
peopla
people should not go about buying
peopla should not go about buying
more
people should not go about buying
more than they need. I went to the
supermarket today. Pasta, no pasta,
no dried pasta at all, no toilet
rolls as you said earlier, Tim
rolls as you said eartier, Tim
Foster
rolls as you said earlier, Tim
Foster people are panic buying.
Foster peopla are panic buying.
There is
Foster people are panic buying.
There is no paracetamol or anything
like that that you can get in the
supermarkets. I understand that but
what I would say is the Government
has supplies of the key things that
are needed and within the food
sunplv.
supply, we are absolutely confident
that people will, that there won’t
that peopla will, that there won’t
be a
that people will, that there won’t
be a problem there. And crucially,
we are working with the supermarkets
to make sure that if people are self
to make sure that if peopla are self
isolating, then
to make sure that if people are self
isolating, then we will be able to
get the food and supplies that they
need.
Louis Mayes? Is a student about to
sit A—levels for a place at
sit A-levels for a place at
university,
sit A—levels for a place at
university, what will happen if our
exams are cut short by the
coronavirus? This is another
important one. We are doing
everything we can to prevent that
everything we ran to prevent that
happening,
everything we can to prevent that
happening, subject to keeping people
safe. The overall principle is that
safe. The overall principla is that
the first
safe. The overall principle is that
the first priority is to keep people
safe, and I
safe, and Ifeel that very
the first priority is to keep people
safe, and I feel that very keenly.
But we also want to minimise the
social and economic disruption.
Hence, unlike some other countries
that have done this, the scientific
advice is clear not to close schools
advice is clear not to dose schools
and colleges.
advice is clear not to close schools
and colleges. The message to schools
is, don’t close unless you have
specifically had advice from Public
Health England to do so was that as
we come into exam season, obviously
we are monitoring that closely and
the education department is doing a
fantastic job in
fantasticjob in keeping the school
fantastic job in keeping the school
system
fantasticjob in keeping the school
system running. But as we get to
system mnning. But as we get to
exams, we
system running. But as we get to
exams, we will do all we can to
exams, we will do all we ran to
allow
exams, we will do all we can to
allow that to proceed. But of
course, you will understand that if
we have to take action to keep
people safe, we are prepared to do
that. One more before I throw it
open. Oliver Carter. What are the
open. Oliver Carter. what are the
government
open. Oliver Carter. What are the
government doing to tackle the
waiting time for coronavirus tests?
Yes, getting the test results back
is obviously important. I know
friends of mine who have had the
tests. Lots of people have talked to
tests. Lots of peopla have talked to
me about
tests. Lots of people have talked to
me about it. We are getting a new
Tech solution into be able to get
the results back to people much
quicker bust—up and we have a lot of
quicker bust-up and we have a lot of
peopla on it. So I
quicker bust—up and we have a lot of
people on it. So I get it and we are
peopla on it. So I get it and we are
trying to
people on it. So I get it and we are
trying to make sure that happens as
quickly as possible. I am going to
go to the audience. Is there
anything any of you are burning to
are layla? It is
are Layla? It is more important than
ever to listen to experts. Thank
goodness for experts and thank
goodness for scientists. We all have
to be mindful of what we are reading
on Facebook, what we are reading on
Twitter, what we might read in
certain newspapers. Newspapers are
partly responsible for panic buying.
You have a choice. You can choose to
buy them or not if you see that they
are stoking this. We have to become,
but listen to the people who know
but listen to the peopla who know
what
but listen to the people who know
what they are talking about,
epidemiologists, doctors who know
epidemiologist, doctors who know
their
epidemiologists, doctors who know
their stuff.
theirstuff. I’m
epidemiologists, doctors who know
their stuff. I’m certainly going to
be encouraging all my friends and
family to do that. Margaret? I
completely agree. It is also
important that we have good
communication. I know Matt and
everybody because politics is aware
everybody because politic is aware
of that.
everybody because politics is aware
of that. There has to be trust
invoices and people have to listen
invoices and peopla have to listen
to
invoices and people have to listen
to them and be able to trust them ——
to them and be able to trust them --
tmsted
to them and be able to trust them ——
trusted voices. And we have to learn
tmsted voices. And we have to learn
from what
trusted voices. And we have to learn
from what is happening
internationally, even it if it is
sometimes what
sometimes whatnot
internationally, even it if it is
sometimes what not to do. I’m going
to take another name to question
here, but keep your hands up if
there are things you want to say was
that I know from all the questions
coming in when you are right that
there are a lot of things you want
to ask. Let me go to Kishan Patel.
How do you expect an already
strained NHS to cope, given that one
in 12 NHS posts are vacant and
health care professionals would need
health rare professionals would need
to
health care professionals would need
to self—isolate for M days if
to self-isolate for 14 days if
exposed to
to self—isolate for M days if
exposed to the virus? Are you a
exposed to the vims? Are you a
health
exposed to the virus? Are you a
health care worker? Yes. What is
health rare worker? Yes. what is
your view on
health care worker? Yes. What is
your view on this? I am worried
because on the wards on a day—to—day
because on the wards on a day-to-day
basis, we are
because on the wards on a day—to—day
basis, we are already at breaching
point and I worry that an
asymptomatic patient with the virus
infects the wards and we lose 50% or
infects the wards and we lose 5096 or
even 2596
infects the wards and we lose 50% or
even 25% of our workforce. And I
even 2596 of our workforce. And I
can’t see
even 25% of our workforce. And I
can’t see how we would be able to
deliver a safe service for patients.
Xand, from your experience in the
health service? It is such an
interesting question. My first
instinct is to have a massive go at
the Tory government and the last ten
years of austerity and the fact that
the NHS has been starved of cash and
the NHS has been starved of rash and
starved
the NHS has been starved of cash and
starved of staff and resources for
so long.
so long. In fact, I think this
represents such a significant burden
that no matter what health service a
country has, the threat of pandemic
disease will always produce disease
that will overwhelm a normally
functioning health service. So
although I share all your concerns
about the NHS and the state of it at
the moment, our ability to provide
the level of intensive care beds,
the level of intensive rare beds,
which is
the level of intensive care beds,
which is the main issue because we
don’t have a cure for coronavirus,
don’t have a cure for coronavims,
so if you come
don’t have a cure for coronavirus,
so if you come into hospital and you
are
arejust
so if you come into hospital and you
are just poorty,
are just poorly, you will not be
are just poorty, you will not be
achieving
are just poorly, you will not be
achieving anything more than you
could at home. So the majority of
peopla stay
people stay at home, get a box set,
have some lemon and honey and
convalesce. If you are deteriorating
convalasce. If you are deteriorating
and
comalasce. If you are deteriorating
and you go into
convalesce. If you are deteriorating
and you go into hospital, the
decision is whether you need
intensive care, things like
ventilation. That is where among the
51:
596 who
ventilation. That is where among the
5% who need that urgent extreme
596 who need that urgent extreme
rare, that is
5% who need that urgent extreme
care, that is where lives are saved.
rare, that is where lives are saved.
Those
care, that is where lives are saved.
Those beds in a major crisis like
this are not
this are notjust going to be
Those beds in a major crisis like
this are notjust going to beJohn
this are not just going to be john
from the
this are notjust going to beJohn
from the normal pool of intensive
rare
care beds. Matt will know much more
rare beds. Matt will know much more
about this
care beds. Matt will know much more
about this than me, but they will be
drawn from the major incident plan
is on the big catastrophe plans. 50
is on the big catastrophe plans. So
although I
is on the big catastrophe plans. 50
although I share your concerns
is on the big catastrophe plans. So
although I share your concerns about
the future of the NHS, in this
particular case I think the
immediate resources come from
elsewhere. I think that is
reasonable. We acknowledge that we
need more people in the NHS. There
was a record number of people
was a record number of peopla
currently
was a record number of people
currently working today in the NHS
and I’m pleased to see those numbers
been going up recently. But Xand is
right that the challenge in the NHS
at the moment is that demand has
been going up. And something like
this will add to that. But I would
say this as well. The NHS is
unbelievably good at responding to
crises. They do it in a small way
every day in all of the A&Es across
every day in all of the Aan across
the country. It
every day in all of the A&Es across
the country. It may have to
reconfigure in some ways if this
does become a pandemic. That has to
be clinically lad
be clinically led so that the
doctors can decide what is the best
doctors ran decide what is the best
“Y
way to save
doctors can decide what is the best
way to save lives, and I will give
them the freedom to make the right
decisions and we are also making
money available if they need it. But
it is less about the money and more
it is lass about the money and more
about how you
it is less about the money and more
about how you use the resources of
the nation best to support people to
get through what will be a
challenging period. Lots of hands
challanging period. Lots of hands
are up. The
challenging period. Lots of hands
are up. The woman in the blue top? I
don’t think enough is being done to
prevent the disease coming into the
country. when
country. When you travel to Asia or
country. when you travel to Asia or
the
country. When you travel to Asia or
the Middle East at the moment, you
are met at airports with your
temperature taken and your symptoms
being monitored and then if you have
symptoms, I don’t know exactly what
happens but the case would have been
happens but the use would have been
recorded.
happens but the case would have been
recorded. In this country, you
arrive at Heathrow or Gatwick,
nothing is done. You might be given
a piece of paper saying call 111.
a piece of paper saying (211111.
You get in a
a piece of paper saying call111.
You get in a taxi and go to a hotel.
There is no hand sanitiser anywhere.
In Asia and other parts of the
world, they are all over the place.
So it seems that anyone coming to
this country, nothing is done at the
airport, so it is going to spread
because there is no prevention. Let
me take a few other points. The
woman there? This presumably could
be our new normal with climate
change. with
change. With increasing
temperatures, new pathogens, this
has been predicted for a long time.
At the same time, we are saying we
are all mobilising when actually,
there is a lot of cross—party
there is a lot of cross-party
proactive
there is a lot of cross—party
proactive action. What can we learn
proactive action. what ran we learn
from this
proactive action. What can we learn
from this that we could apply to the
larger existential problem that is
climate change? The man in the dark
blue shirt? Social
blue shirt? Socialfactors
climate change? The man in the dark
blue shirt? Social factors are also
important. Since the outbreak I have
seen a spike in races on social
media. On public transport my fence
have been ——
have been -- my
media. On public transport my fence
have been —— my friends have been
have been -- my friends have been
targeted and I
have been —— my friends have been
targeted and I was an attack on an
Asian man. What is the government
Asian man. what is the government
doing to stop
Asian man. What is the government
doing to stop this racist rhetoric,
this is the same government that
failed with the Brexit hate from the
media. What are you going to do
media. what are you going to do
about
media. What are you going to do
about that? And the man in the
glasses? I think we as a community
ran play a big
can play a big part. It is not
glasses? I think we as a community
can play a big part. It is notjust
ran play a big part. It is not just
down to
can play a big part. It is notjust
down to the NHS and the health
professionals. We should be looking
out for our neighbours, elderly and
vulnerable people that we know. We
should help them out as best we can.
should help them out as best we ran.
Let me get
should help them out as best we can.
Let me get around the rest of the
panel. Tim? On the point about the
NHS, I
NHS, Iagree
panel. Tim? On the point about the
NHS, I agree with all the points are
being made, but
being made, butl
NHS, I agree with all the points are
being made, but I want to pick on
what Margaret said about how this
crisis is probably going to expose
weaknesses that already exist. In
the rase
the case of the NHS, readers of my
the rase of the NHS, readers of my
newspaper the
the case of the NHS, readers of my
newspaper the Telegraph report
difficulties getting through on the
111 number, difficulties getting a
all
call back. There’s the
111 number, difficulties getting a
callback. There’s the question of
all back. There’s the question of
whether
callback. There’s the question of
whether GPs will be doing visits,
because they have stopped doing home
visits in many parts of the country
for a long time. A&E is already
overcrowded. Then you have the
problem of people being in hospital
problem of peopla being in hospital
is at
problem of people being in hospital
is at the moment who shouldn’t be.
They should be in social care. It is
They should be in social rare. It is
not just an NHS
They should be in social care. It is
notjust an NHS problem, it is also
not just an NHS problam, it is also
a social
notjust an NHS problem, it is also
a social care problem. And listening
a social rare problem. And listening
to the
a social care problem. And listening
to the agreement on the panel is
fantastic, but as the lady in the
audience suggested, I am intrigued
as to why we don’t see more of this.
Surely there are some problems in
our society which are indeed
nonpartisan and it would be nice to
hear this kind of tone and this kind
of working together. If only we
could have displayed spirit when it
fame
came to the environment or our
fame to the environment or our
schools
came to the environment or our
schools and hospitals —— if only we
schools and hospitals -- if only we
could have
schools and hospitals —— if only we
could have this blitz spirit.
Margaret, let me take you back to
the original question, how do you
expect an already strained NHS to
cope, given that one in 12 NHS posts
are vacant and health care
professionals would need to
self—isolate for a fortnight if
self-isolate for a fortnight if
exposed?
self—isolate for a fortnight if
exposed? One of the other things is
that this is going to make us look
at other things, not
at other things, notjust the health
at other things, not just the health
service,
at other things, notjust the health
service, which most of us think of
as hospitals and GPs. But it was
raised in the House yesterday in the
same, constructive tone, but we
don’t yet know what the public
health budget is or if there is
going to be much of an improvement
in the public health budget. Local
authorities, particularly if this
authorities, particularty if this
gets worse,
authorities, particularly if this
gets worse, will be asked to play a
heroic role. They already have great
responsibilities for social care
responsibilities for social rare
which they
responsibilities for social care
which they are struggling to fulfil.
which they are stmggling to fulfil.
So one
which they are struggling to fulfil.
So one of the things that ought to
come out of all of this is for us to
recognise a
recognise afresh
come out of all of this is for us to
recognise a fresh the need for
long-term
long—term sustained investment. That
long-term sustained investment. That
goes back to the
long—term sustained investment. That
goes back to the point the lady
raised about climate change. The
answer to all of this is to have
Proper.
proper, long—term planning, whether
proper, long-term planning, whether
it is for
proper, long—term planning, whether
it is for floods or feeders.
it is for floods or feeders. ——
it is for ﬂoods or feeders. --
fevers. We
it is for floods or feeders. ——
fevers. We have to recognise the
challenges of our world and prepare
challanges of our world and prepare
for
challenges of our world and prepare
for them on a consistent and
thorough basis, taking in all the
scientific advice along the way.
Layla? |
Layla? I completely agree with what
layla? I completely agree with what
Margaret has
Layla? I completely agree with what
Margaret has said. With Tim’s point
Margaret has said. with Tim’s point
about
Margaret has said. With Tim’s point
about adult social care, there is a
about adult social rare, there is a
lot of goodwill
about adult social care, there is a
lot of goodwill in the House and
across parties to work on this. But
it is a Conservative majority
government with a big majority.
During the election, I remember
Boris
BorisJohnson saying that
During the election, I remember
Boris Johnson saying that within
BorisJohnson saying that within the
Boris johnson saying that within the
first
BorisJohnson saying that within the
first 100 days, he would convene a
cross-party
cross—party commission to look at
cross-party commission to look at
this
cross—party commission to look at
this intractable problem and to help
us find a solution. It is day 84
today and we still haven’t seen
that, so
that, sol
today and we still haven’t seen
that, so I guess my plea would be to
the government, you need to show
some leadership. That is how
governments work. The government ‘s
use this stuff and then parliament
use this stuff and then partiament
will engage
use this stuff and then parliament
will engage with it. But the
government has to initiate it. I
hope we will get on and solve some
of these big issues, because it
can’t wait any longer. But, do you
want to answer some of the questions
put by members of the audience? The
lady talking about people coming
lady talking about peopla coming
into
lady talking about people coming
into the country, for example. Yes,
I will answer as many as I can. I
I will answer as many as I ran. I
agree on a point
I will answer as many as I can. I
agree on a point in social care and
agree on a point in social rare and
we will
agree on a point in social care and
we will fulfil that manifesto
commitment. The point about people
commitment. The point about peopla
coming into the
commitment. The point about people
coming into the country, I have been
asked about this a lot. The thing is
that if this virus becomes
established around the world, then
there is no way of stopping it
getting to Britain eventually. So
the decision was, do you try to shut
ourselves off as a nation and delay
it, and if it does go pandemic in
the rest of the world, it is
inevitable that it would come here?
Or
0rdo
inevitable that it would come here?
Or do you try to keep as much normal
life as possibla
life as possible and tackle it by
life as possibla and tackla it by
finding
life as possible and tackle it by
finding those who do come into the
country and are then symptomatic? So
you rightly got a leaflet saying
you rightly got a leaﬂet saying
that
you rightly got a leaflet saying
that if
you rightly got a leaﬂet saying
that if you
you rightly got a leaflet saying
that if you had a symptom, you
should call 111 and if you had a
should (211111 and if you had a
symptom, no
should call 111 and if you had a
symptom, no doubt you would have
rallad
called 111. Lots of people did and
rallad 111. Lots of peopla did and
that was
called 111. Lots of people did and
that was how we found many of the
cases. There was one country in
Europe that chose to stop the
ﬂights, and
flights, and that was Italy. And
ﬂights, and that was Italy. And
they
flights, and that was Italy. And
they became the European epicentre
of this epidemic. In a way, that
really demonstrated to me how we
must follow the science. Of course
there are pressures on me to do
things which people feel intuitively
things which peopla feel intuitively
that they
things which people feel intuitively
that they are right and I understand
where you are coming from on this.
But we have to follow the science
and the epidemiology, and our Chief
Medical Officer, 3 shout out to
Medical Officer, a shout out to
Chris
Medical Officer, 3 shout out to
Chris Whitty, brilliant scientist.
Chris whitty, brilliant scientist.
He is
Chris Whitty, brilliant scientist.
He is the voice of calm reason. He
is one of the most experienced
epidemiologists in the world and he
said to me, if we stop the flights,
said to me, if we stop the ﬂights,
with all
said to me, if we stop the flights,
with all the consequences that
brings, it would only delay the
arrival of this disease here by a
matter of days, but it would also
make it harder for us to get
medicines into this country that we
need, because many of them are
produced abroad. What about ticking
produced abroad. what about ticking
people’s
produced abroad. What about ticking
people’s temperatures at the
airport? Checking the temperature
doesn’t have an effect. The reason
is that you get lots of false
positives. You get lots of people
positives. You get lots of peopla
who
positives. You get lots of people
who have a temperature and it is not
for coronavims,
for coronavirus, so you end up
for coronavims, so you end up
spending
for coronavirus, so you end up
spending huge amount of resources
and not spotting the people. The
Americans tried checking
temperatures. It may have reassured
peopla. It has
people. It has had no impact on the
peopla. It has had no impact on the
spread of
people. It has had no impact on the
spread of the virus there, and the
Italians also did it. So I hear
Italians also did it. Sol hear all
Italians also did it. So I hear all
these things
Italians also did it. Sol hear all
these things and I instinctively
agree with many of them. It is a bit
like the point about the mass
gatherings. I understand why it
seems intuitive that that is the
right thing to do, but the judgment
that I made with the prime minister
at the start of this is that we are
going to listen very hard to the
scientists. We are going to think
through this problem as a country
and they are going to try to have
the best possible response despite
the pressures, and then it is
incumbent on us to explain why we
are taking the approach that we are.
get the food and supplies that they
need.
Before we carry on, I want to tell
you next week is budget week. Next
week in West Bromwich and the
following week in Weston—super—Mare.
following week in Weston-super-Mare.
If you want to
following week in Weston—super—Mare.
If you want to be in the audience
you ran all or
you can call or go to the Question
you ran all or go to the Question
Time
you can call or go to the Question
Time website and follow the
instructions. Who knows where we
instructions. who knows where we
will be
instructions. Who knows where we
will be with this story next week or
the week after. Let me take another
question now from Chris Belton.
question now from Chris Bolton.
Thank you.
question now from Chris Belton.
Thank you. How will the government
ensure that providers of adult
social care are sufficiently
resourced to respond to the demands
of coronavirus? You touched a little
bit on that but that is something a
lot of peopla
lot of people have been asking
lot of peopla have been asking
about. I
lot of people have been asking
about. I will come back to you in a
minute. You can deal with all these
minute. You ran deal with all these
questions in
minute. You can deal with all these
questions in some shape or form.
layla, do you
Layla, do you want to kick this off?
layla, do you want to kick this off?
This is
Layla, do you want to kick this off?
This is probably the thing that
worries me the most in my own
family... who is
family... Who is going to be there
family... who is going to be there
to look
family... Who is going to be there
to look after the older generation,
especially as there is about one in
ten jobs to fill in that sector? I
think it’s 122,000 people are
needed. And if at any one time 20%
needed. And if at any one time 2096
of them go off
needed. And if at any one time 20%
of them go off sick, who will fill
in the gaps? I think this is why we
I needed to solve this earlier. We
I needed to solve this eartier. We
have to
I needed to solve this earlier. We
have to do our best moving forward
and there will be people covering
for people at a time like this, the
for peopla at a time like this, the
same
for people at a time like this, the
same with the NHS, in the end it
will be the doctors and nurses, it
will be care staff who will cover
will be rare staff who will cover
for
will be care staff who will cover
for other care staff and burn
themselves out and they will rise to
the challenge, I have absolutely no
the challange, I have absolutely no
doubt. I
the challenge, I have absolutely no
doubt. I thank them from the bottom
of my heart and I’m sure others as
well as well, for what they are
going to do, but nevertheless, we
need to solve this problem as soon
as possible. I very much hope that
this is the wake—up call that our
this is the wake-up call that our
country needs
this is the wake—up call that our
country needs for issues like adult
social rare,
social care, also climate change,
social rare, also climate change,
also the
social care, also climate change,
also the others, because we can’t
wait. Chris, do you work in social
rare? Curry
rare? Curryl
wait. Chris, do you work in social
rare? Curry I do.
care? Curry I do. What do you do and
rare? Curry I do. what do you do and
what are your
care? Curry I do. What do you do and
what are your concerns? I work in a
rare centre,
care centre, people with dementia.
rare centre, people with dementia.
But I’m
care centre, people with dementia.
But I’m also concerned about people
But I’m also concerned about peopla
living at
But I’m also concerned about people
living at home on their own or with
carers who may be elderly
themselves. It is about the number
of support staff who can help those
of support staff who ran help those
peopla. But I
of support staff who can help those
people. But I would imagine the
peopla. But I would imagine the
peopla that
people. But I would imagine the
people that run the services are
people that nm the services are
also saying
people that run the services are
also saying we can’t do it without
additional financial resources.
additionalfinancial resources. I
additional financial resources. I
think
additionalfinancial resources. I
think that is a key issue as well.
In your rare
In your care centre are you having
In your rare centre are you having
these
In your care centre are you having
these conversations? The government
has talked about a worst—case
has talked about a worst-case
scenario,
has talked about a worst—case
scenario, one in five falling ill,
about what you would do, how you
would look after the people you care
would look after the peopla you rare
for? I
would look after the people you care
for? I think there are often crisis
is within care centres brought on by
is within rare centres brought on by
different
is within care centres brought on by
different things. This is probably
the most challenging. I think people
the most challanging. I think peopla
are
arejust
the most challenging. I think people
arejust waiting,
are just waiting, knowing that they
will respond in some way, providing
they are well enough and if they are
not well enough, that their
colleagues will do it on their
behalf. Right, you step in and do
your best. Margaret? Well, I was
your best. Margaret? Well, Iwas
just thinking, it
your best. Margaret? Well, I was
just thinking, it goes back to what
the gentleman at the back said. In
the gentleman at the hack said. In
the end, I
the gentleman at the back said. In
the end, I suspect, I
the end, I suspect, Ifear,
the gentleman at the back said. In
the end, Isuspect, Ifear, that
the end, I suspect, I fear, that if
the end, Isuspect, Ifear, that if
it does get bad,
the end, I suspect, I fear, that if
it does get bad, we will rely on
people to volunteer to help others
and a sense of community and
everybody looking after each other.
And actually, although this is a
terribly worrying situation, I’d
rather like the idea that help and
cooperation and friendliness and
people being nice to each other for
a change, may spread. APPLAUSE
Talking of cooperation, one of the
suggestions that has come from
government is the doctors, nurses
who have retired to come back into
help. Is there anyone here in that
situation who might consider... Yes,
you and the front? We will
you and the front? We willjust get
you and the front? We will just get
a microphone
you and the front? We willjust get
a microphone two, one second. Yes,
so you are a forward nurse or
doctor? Retired staff nurse, I
retired 15 years ago. I
retired 15 years ago. Ijust
doctor? Retired staff nurse, I
retired 15 years ago. I just feel...
I wouldn’t feel very comfortable
after being away for so long, back
in the workplace. Then there is also
the question of registration. I have
given up my registration, so that
would need to be taken care of as
would need to be taken rare of as
well. You
would need to be taken care of as
well. You would have to train for
that? There is a back to nursing
course, yes, you would have to do a
back to nursing course. Is it
something that appeals to you or
does it seem impractical? Not at my
age! Xand com you have been a
practising doctor
practising doctorfor a
age! Xand com you have been a
practising doctor for a while.
practising doctorfor a while. I
practising doctor for a while. I
spent ten
practising doctorfor a while. I
spent ten years working in the NHS
but I haven’t in years. No one has
contacted me yet to demand my
services. I could always swap in as
my identical twin brother who is
front line NHS staff and he would be
grateful for that.
gratefulforthat. I
front line NHS staff and he would be
grateful for that. I totally echo
what you are saying. It is
enormously, you don’t have to have
been out of practice for very long
to be de—skilled. I think the idea
to be tie-skilled. I think the idea
of a Dad’s
to be de—skilled. I think the idea
of a Dad’s Army of health care
professionals is quite charming,
quite British. I do think that there
is an enormous role for individuals
is an enormous rola for individuals
with
is an enormous role for individuals
with expertise to provide help and
rare in
care in their communities, to their
rare in their communities, to their
family
care in their communities, to their
family members. I would certainly be
prepared to step up in that. But the
issue of registration, terms of
response polity, insurance, payment,
all these things are pretty
complicated. It feels to me like
that as a backbone of the response
won’t be a significant contribution.
I would say, I think a couple of
peopla have
people have raised this idea and
Margaret raised it so eloquently of
us helping each other. This epidemic
demonstrates one thing incredibly
dearty. That
clearly. That we are all as
vulnerable as the most vulnerable
people among us. When you look
peopla among us. when you look
across
people among us. When you look
across the Atlantic, you see a group
of peopla, 30
of people, 30 million Americans with
of peopla, 30 million Americans with
no
of people, 30 million Americans with
no insurance or access to adequate
health care and many of them in
health rare and many of them in
precarious
health care and many of them in
precarious employment. We have a
better social safety net and
institution and we should treasure
it because those are the things that
keep us safe. APPLAUSE
On the point about social care
On the point about social rare
funding I
On the point about social care
funding I don’t want to break up the
Kumbaya moment. Is that what you are
falling
calling it?! All three parties have
been in power and have failed to
tackle the issue of the funding
formula for the care sector. That
formula for the rare sector. That
includes
formula for the care sector. That
includes the Lib Dems. One reason
why they have failed to do that is
because of budget cuts, austerity,
which was passed on to local
government, which is where so many
sacrifices were made. Local
governments couldn’t raise taxes
unless they had a referendum so they
didn’t have the funds to do it. And
politicians were reluctant to ask us
to sell a property or two in some
“Y
way after we have passed on, to use
that property to finance our own
rare. So
care. 50 the reason why the money
rare. So the reason why the money
isn’t there
care. 50 the reason why the money
isn’t there is because this issue
has been dodged. On the point about
volunteering and stepping up. People
of course do that all the time
already. People do that by caring
already. People do that by raring
for their
already. People do that by caring
for their relatives as it is. I’ve
been thinking about this crisis from
a Christian perspective. It strikes
me that back in the dim and distant
past, whenever something odd like
this happened, people always assumed
it was a punishment from God.
Western society has changed.
Increasingly, the way we
theologically think about disasters
like this is it is a test of us.
when
When one asks where is God in this
when one asks where is God in this
scenario?
When one asks where is God in this
scenario? It is in whether or not we
step up and do our duty. 50 this is
step up and do our duty. So this is
awful, peopla
step up and do our duty. 50 this is
awful, people are worried. We will
awful, peopla are worried. We will
get through it,
awful, people are worried. We will
get through it, I’m sure. Look upon
it also as a test of us, as
individuals. I think right now, it
feels as though we are passing that
test. APPLAUSE
So,
50, Matt, picking up on two of the
So, Matt, picking up on two of the
things. The
50, Matt, picking up on two of the
things. The concerns about
So, Matt, picking up on two of the
things. The concerns about who will
look after those who can’t look
after themselves in a social care
after themselves in a social rare
setting, for
after themselves in a social care
setting, for example. Then this idea
of getting a Dad’s Army... Of
doctors and nurses. On that point...
On that point first of all, are you
considering changing registration or
relaxing the rules so doctors and
relaxing the mles so doctors and
nurses
relaxing the rules so doctors and
nurses can come back more easily?
nurses ran come back more easily?
Yes. We do
nurses can come back more easily?
Yes. We do want people who are
qualified but also especially those
who are... Who have very recent
who are... who have very recent
experience, to
who are... Who have very recent
experience, to be able to come back
in. We will change the rules around
in. We will change the mles around
registration
in. We will change the rules around
registration that were raised to
make that easier. And also make it
easier to volunteer, because
volunteers, so the point about the
community having a role to play,
community having a rola to play,
volunteering,
community having a role to play,
volunteering, people volunteering to
help, for instance in social care,
help, for instance in social rare,
is incredibly
help, for instance in social care,
is incredibly important. But you
have to make sure you get the skill
set right, so that treatment is safe
and people are looked after. So
volunteers, people making a
volunteers, peopla making a
voluntary
volunteers, people making a
voluntary effort is really, really
important and will be one part of
the response. But it couldn’t by no
means he the whole part. I’m also
the Secretary of State for so care.
the Secretary of State for so rare.
Getting the
the Secretary of State for so care.
Getting the response rate in social
rare is
care is absolutely vital for this.
rare is absolutely vital for this.
Not
care is absolutely vital for this.
Not least because one of the facets
of this virus is that... The impact
is are highly correlated with age.
One of the saving graces is children
appear not to have any symptoms
except in a rare number of cases.
But it does have a particularly bad
But it does have a particularty bad
impact on
But it does have a particularly bad
impact on people either with
pre—existing health conditions or
pre-existing health conditions or
who are
pre—existing health conditions or
who are older. What will you do when
who are older. what will you do when
the carers
who are older. What will you do when
the carers are ill? We are putting
more money on, there is an increase
in [oral authority
in local authority budgets coming at
in [oral authority budgets coming at
the end
in local authority budgets coming at
the end of this month, so they can
the end of this month, so they ran
plan for that
the end of this month, so they can
plan for that now. And making sure
that that resource is there, that is
important, but so also is the staff,
exactly as you said. It is
particularly important in social
particularty important in social
rare, in a
particularly important in social
care, in a residential setting,
rare, in a residential setting,
where many
care, in a residential setting,
where many of the residents
themselves will be frail and older.
So this
50 this is a particular concern. We
So this is a particular concern. We
have more guidance for you coming
out next week. It is something we
are working incredibly hard on. On
the longer term point... Boris
johnson said
Johnson said he had a plan ready to
johnson said he had a plan ready to
go on the steps
Johnson said he had a plan ready to
go on the steps of Downing Street?
It is best done on a cross—party
It is best done on a cross-party
basis. I
It is best done on a cross—party
basis. I think the spirit of this
panel is a good run in order to make
panel is a good nm in order to make
changes to social
panel is a good run in order to make
changes to social care. My thought
changes to social rare. My thought
is the
changes to social care. My thought
is the reason it hasn’t been cracked
under governments of all colours
over the last 20 years has been...
It’s been a failure of political
economy rather than of policy. I
also point out, we had choices and
in elections Liberal Democrats put
forward things like a penny on the
pound on income tax to go directly
into the NHS and adult social care.
into the NHS and adult social rare.
So I reject that
into the NHS and adult social care.
50 I reject that it is a case that
So I reject that it is a use that
we
So I reject that it is a case that
we haven’t been brave enough to ask.
But I really hope that this
cross—party commission is going to
cross-party commission is going to
come up with
cross—party commission is going to
come up with how do we sustainably
longer term fund this issue? Because
unless we do this cross—party, it is
unless we do this cross-party, it is
going to be a ten,
unless we do this cross—party, it is
going to be a ten, 20 year endeavour
and I’m deeply concerned that it is
going to get dodged again and kicked
into the long grass. Let’s meet up
when we are back and the offer is
there for you as well, Margaret, and
let’s take this forward. We had a
cross-party
cross—party commission when Andy
cross-party commission when Andy
Burnham
cross—party commission when Andy
Burnham was Secretary of State. It
got very close, we thought, to
agreement. Then David Cameron pulled
the plug end we haven’t had a
successful one since. I can see
quite a few of you have your hands
up. I’m going to move on, if I may.
As you take your hands down, I’m
sorry! The question I am coming to
Next, lots of you asked about this
as well. I don’t think I would be
doing the right thing if we didn’t
come to it. I would like to hear
from Dale Fairless, please. Has
from Dale Fairlass, please. Has
Priti
from Dale Fairless, please. Has
Priti Patel’s position as Home
Secretary
Secretary become untenable after the
recent claims of bullying? Margaret,
do you want to kick us off on that?
It dearty has
It clearly has become untenable
because she is still there. LAUGHTER
because she is still there. MUGHTER
Do you think
because she is still there. LAUGHTER
Do you think she will last? I think
it’s getting close. I think the
thing that is... She’s clearly...
thing that is... She’s dearty...
This isn’t
thing that is... She’s clearly...
This isn’t somebody I know well, at
all. Looking at the range of
comments, it does seem to me that
she is somebody who can be very
she is somebody who ran be very
charming to
she is somebody who can be very
charming to important colleagues
around her and they all think she’s
absolutely great, but if you are not
an important collie, it might not be
quite so easy. I think the thing
that is difficult for her is that
there is a pattern and there is a
whole set of different departments.
If it was one department, you might
think that was it. It is in three of
the four government departments
she’s worked in. One thing that is
important to say, it gets very
misleading. In my experience, which
is reasonably substantial, there is
nothing civil servants like more
than a minister who knows what they
want and nothing they hate more than
a minister who doesn’t know what
they want. So the notion that
somehow this civil service doesn’t
like ministers who have policies
that they want to pursue and know
how they want to go about it is just
rubbish. Of course, what the
minister wants is unrealistic or
unlawful or something,
unlawful orsomething, I
minister wants is unrealistic or
unlawful or something, I appreciate
it may be difficult. Tim? APPLAUSE
This is more like it, we can go back
This is more like it, we ran go back
to tearing lumps
This is more like it, we can go back
to tearing lumps out of each other.
Less Kumbaya! Exactly. Two things.
One is that it feels like there is a
party political briefing operation
against Priti Patel taking place.
Secondly, there is a broad context
which is that the government has a
lot it wants to do in the next year
and probably the Home Office has
more than any other department has
to do, including things like
tackling knife crime and introducing
a new immigration system in time for
the proper Brexit when it finally
comes. So the Home Secretary is
probably cracking the whip and
trying to get civil servants to do
things which in some cases, they
possibly don’t feel they have the
resources or the time to do. And
unfortunately, one suspects some of
the civil servants don’t want to do
these things. We can’t say if these
allegations are true, but some of
them go back about five years, well
before what you are talking about.
That element is a he said/ she said
thing. If there’s any bullying in
any department, including John
Bercow if he was guilty of that,
that would be unacceptable too. If
Priti Patel was guilty of that, that
would be acceptable. But I think
would be acceptabla. But I think
there is
would be acceptable. But I think
there is a political context to this
which makes me suspicious of some of
the politics going on behind the
the politic going on behind the
scenes.
the politics going on behind the
scenes. She has a lot of things that
she wants to get done and
unfortunately, parts of the civil
service have come to regard
themselves as a sort of
constitutional checkup on the
executive, that they are there to
say, you can’t do this or that. That
is not acceptable because whatever
you think of Priti Patel, she is the
elected representative of the
people. The civil service is there
to help her get get done what the
people have voted to do.
people have voted to do. Our civil
service are better and more
professional at doing that than
almost any other civil service in
the world, and respected across the
world.
world. And the New Labour, at least
world. And the New labour, at least
one Home
world. And the New Labour, at least
one Home Secretary described the
civil service is not fit for
purpose. When you have a radical
purpose. when you have a radical
government,
purpose. When you have a radical
government, you always get the civil
service saying they don’t know what
they are doing. The woman in the
front? I was going to say, this lady
has had problems in three
departments. They are allegations,
you can’t come to a conclusion about
that. She denies them. She also had
to leave the government previously
because she was talking to the
Israeli government or something like
that. So it’s not the first time
something has not
something has notjust been an
something has not just been an
allegation.
something has notjust been an
allegation. The woman in the black
and white top? Could it be that
certain members of the civil service
are using accusations of bullying to
hide behind, when in fact, it may be
laziness, resistance to change or
incompetence? And the man in the
blue sweater? I wonder whether there
is an element of sexism. Her
behaviour in a man
behaviour in a men might be seen as
behaviour in a man might be seen as
assertive, but in Priti Patel, it is
interpreted as being bullying. What
interpreted as being bullying. what
do the panel
interpreted as being bullying. What
do the panel think of that? Well,
first of all, I think we need a
proper investigation into this that
is actually independent.
is actually independent. As with
anyone who faces allegations like
this at work, we would expect that
the right process is followed, but
my concern is that that independent
investigation is going to be done by
the Cabinet Office, and I don’t
think that that is very independent.
It needs to be properly independent.
It needs to be property independent.
But
It needs to be properly independent.
But what it does speak to in my
view, and let’s leave Priti Patel to
one side because there is a broader
bullying culture that is emanating
from Number Ten. We have seen
Dominic Cummings firing large
numbers of special advisers. My
understanding is that one of them is
suing Number Ten for wrongful
dismissal. And I believe that
obviously, bullying and harassment
have no place in any organisation.
Number Ten should not be exempt from
that. But you also set the tone from
government. You set the tone not
just for the civil service, but the
whole of the country. We have been
talking today about compassion and
pulling together and wouldn’t it be
wonderful if we were nicer to each
other? Well, I’m sorry to say that
also applies to the way people treat
each other in government, in
partiament
parliament and in our institutions
partiament and in our institutions
because
parliament and in our institutions
because it matters and it filters
into society. If we are serious
about that, we should be worried and
take these allegations against Priti
Patel and others in government very
seriously. We deserve better than
them. Xand.
them. Xand. I couldn’t agree more
with layla. You
with Layla. You raise the issue of
with layla. You raise the issue of
sexism.
with Layla. You raise the issue of
sexism. One thing that does concern
me in the conversation about Priti
Patel, she is too many people on the
left one of the least likeable
members of the Cabinet. Her support
for the death penalty, 3
for the death penalty, a wavering
support for the death penalty, the
overall agenda of the Home Office
seems particularly efficient and
unpleasant. So there is a
unpleasant. So there is atone ——
unpleasant. So there is a tone --
the agenda
unpleasant. So there is atone ——
the agenda seems vicious, so there
is a tone
is atone which seems equally
is a tone which seems equally
unpleasant. In general, the
nastiness of the rhetoric around the
party political positions on social
media does trickle down. I work a
media does trickla down. I work a
lot with
media does trickle down. I work a
lot with schools and film with
children and we are seeing a rise in
bullying and a rise in nastiness.
Coming out of Number Ten for sure,
but also coming out of an adult
class that is increasingly divided.
So in exposing concern about Priti
Patel, of course there should be an
investigation. It is also important
that peopla
that people who don’t like her and
that peopla who don’t like her and
are
that people who don’t like her and
are concerned about these
allegations do not then adopt that
tone themselves. Has her position
become untenable? I am not in the
become untenabla? I am not in the
Home Office,
become untenable? I am not in the
Home Office, so until there is an
investigation, it is impossible to
say, but it is concerning. Let’s
talk about this investigation in a
moment. Given what has been set on
the panel here and given the
allegations about Priti Patel going
back five years, when did you first
hear concerns about her behaviour?
when I
When I turned on my TV on a Saturday
when I turned on my TV on a Saturday
and saw the
When I turned on my TV on a Saturday
and saw the resignation of one of
the civil servants. In the Home
Office? 50 nothing was heard by you
Office? So nothing was heard by you
prior to that? Absolutely not. I
know Priti Patel well. I have worked
with her a lot. She is determined.
She certainly wants to get her
agenda through and that is what we
want in a Home Secretary. In my
experience, and all the
conversations and dealings I have
had with her and her team, she has
always been courteous, polite and
straightforward. So were you
surprised by the allegations, and so
many of them? Yes, I am. It is vital
that we have an investigation. That
is under way. It has Alex Allan, who
is independent. Is that into the
allegations from all three
departments? It is into all of the
facts. I don’t think we should be
jumping to conclusions before we
have the facts. I think the agenda
that Priti is pursuing is probably
closer to the views of the British
people and home affairs in terms of
peopla and home affairs in terms of
putting in
people and home affairs in terms of
putting in place controls on
immigration and more police, than
any Home Secretary for many decades.
And I support her in doing that. But
Matt, today is World Book Day. One
of my favourite books is Harry
Potter. Here is a quote from serious
black, who was himself bullied. If
you want to judge a man,
you want tojudge a man, or in this
use a woman,
case a women, look at how they treat
use a woman, look at how they treat
their inferiors,
case a women, look at how they treat
their inferiors, not their peers. ——
their inferiors, not their peers. --
a quote from
their inferiors, not their peers. ——
a quote from Sirius Black
a quote from Sirius Black. In this
use, if
use, ifI
a quote from Sirius Black. In this
use, if I were
case, if I were Priti Patel and I
use, if I were Priti Pateland I
were hearing
case, if I were Priti Patel and I
were hearing these allegations, and
you are hearing these as well, are
you really so comfortable backing
her to the hilt in the way you are?
There are others who could drive
through the mandate that you want to
get through, and I completely
disagree with a lot of it. The Home
Office, by the way, in my
constituency surgery, that hostile
environment still exists. Windrush
environment still exists. windmsh
citizens
environment still exists. Windrush
citizens now, this is a department
that does desperately need
leadership but needs a lot of
compassion and a lot of change, but
not in this direction. Are you
really that comfortable backing her
in
really that comfortable hacking her
in the way
really that comfortable backing her
in the way that you are? I would
certainly be uncomfortable with
taking the position, as you seem to
have done, of presuming her guilty
before you have seen the facts.
before you have seen the facts. The
man in the checked shirt there? Do
we really need a long, expensive,
drawn—out independent investigation
drawn-out independent investigation
for
drawn—out independent investigation
for claims that she allegedly may
for claims that she allagedly may
have
for claims that she allegedly may
have shouted at someone three or
four years ago? Because you think it
doesn’t matter because you have
already made your mind up? Not that
it doesn’t matter, but there are
more important issues we could be
looking at as opposed to someone
alloyedly
allegedly shouting at someone. There
are a lot of anti—Semitism claims in
are a lot of anti-Semitism claims in
the labour Party.
are a lot of anti—Semitism claims in
the Labour Party. That deserves an
the labour Party. That deserves an
independent
the Labour Party. That deserves an
independent investigation. It is
being investigated by the Equality
and Human Rights Commission. Is that
the same as shouting at someone a
few years ago? I am not sure it is.
The man in the glasses. What would
The man in the glasses. what would
the
The man in the glasses. What would
the consequences be if she were
found guilty of the allegations?
Would she be expected to resign or
would she retain her position? That
is a matter for the
is a matterfor the prime minister.
is a matter for the prime minister.
But we
is a matterfor the prime minister.
But we haven’t reached that because
we want to get to the bottom of
allegations. It is reasonable to
allagations. It is reasonabla to
investigate
allegations. It is reasonable to
investigate allegations. What is
unreasonable is people who disagree
with her policies saying she should
be got rid of before that has even
happened. It is ironic that the Home
Secretary is not getting due
justice. That doesn’t seem quite
fair.
fair. There is a presumption of
guilt in this conversation. I didn’t
say that an Layla didn’t say that
say that an layla didn’t say that
either. I
say that an Layla didn’t say that
either. I said
either. Isaid I
say that an Layla didn’t say that
either. I said I don’t know what is
happening in the Foreign Office ——
happening in the Foreign Office --
Home
happening in the Foreign Office ——
Home Office, but it’s important to
investigate and it’s important that
we do not create a culture of
bullying against Priti Patel, no
matter what we think of some of her
odious policies. I was very clear
about that. Let me hear more from
the audience. Given the number of
senior ministers who have already
shown their support for Priti Patel,
is a ministerial investigation then
tmly
truly independent? It isn’t a
ministerial investigation, it’s an
investigation by the Cabinet Office
with the independent adviser to the
Cabinet Office, so Alex Allan. And
let that investigation go ahead.
Imagine an alternative scenario,
which is simply the allegations are
made and the prime minister
immediately dropped her. That would
set a dreadful president at the
beginning of this government. The
message it would send to the civil
service is, if you don’t like
policies of your senior minister,
make a complaint and get rid of
them. Hold on, you are saying that
these civil servants don’t like the
policies. How do you know that? You
can’t know that. This is why an
investigation is so important. The
question I was asking is, why is
Boris
BorisJohnson and you so comfortable
Boris johnson and you so comfortable
backing her to
BorisJohnson and you so comfortable
backing her to the hilt in the way
hacking her to the hilt in the way
that you are?
backing her to the hilt in the way
that you are? Let’s put it to an
investigation. Why go and say she is
investigation. why go and say she is
wonderful,
investigation. Why go and say she is
wonderful, she has always been
lovely to me? So she supposed to go
into purdah for the next six months
and hide from the public during the
investigation? She has to her
investigation? She has to herjob.
investigation? She has to her job.
But ran
investigation? She has to herjob.
But can we stop suggesting that
But ran we stop suggesting that
civil
But can we stop suggesting that
civil servants are somehow
constructing some kind of
conspiracy? We have spent the first
part of this programme talking about
how we need to treat each other with
respect and listen to experts. There
are many expert people in the civil
service who are well worth listening
to and deserve our respect. We are
almost out of time. It is vital in
this country that people are
innocent and not resumed guilty
until the facts are established. But
the final thing that is so critical
is that civil servants, medics, the
is that civil servants, media, the
NHS and
is that civil servants, medics, the
NHS and ministers work together
closely on this great crisis of
coronavirus that we were talking
about for most of the programme. It
shows that this is a completely
separate question. The way that
ministers and civil servants can and
ministers and civil servants ran and
do work
ministers and civil servants can and
do work together across government
has just been shown in exemplary
fashion on the coronavirus issue and
is
fashion on the coronavims issue and
is continuing
fashion on the coronavirus issue and
is continuing 24/7 to keep people
is continuing 24/7 to keep peopla
safe. I’m
is continuing 24/7 to keep people
safe. I’m afraid our time is up. The
agreement lasted quite a lot of the
programme and then
programme and thenjust
agreement lasted quite a lot of the
programme and then just vanished,
but we enjoyed it while it was
there. Next week we are in West Brom
which in the following week we are
in Weston—super—Mare.
in Weston—super—Mare. If you want to
in Weston-super-Mare. If you want to
have your say on
in Weston—super—Mare. If you want to
have your say on tonight’stopics and
have your say on tonight’stopis and
marry on
carry on this
have your say on tonight’stopics and
carry on this conversation, you can
carry on this conversation, you ran
join Adrian Chiles
carry on this conversation, you can
join Adrian Chiles and guests on
Question Time Extra Time, which is
always is on 5 Live right now. But
for now, you very much of the panel.
Thank you to all of you for your
points on your questions, and of
course to you at home for watching
and listening. From Tunbridge Wells,
bye-bye-
We’re going back to Afghan.
It’s a lot of new faces
that need bedding in.
THEY SHOUT
It was your fault!
They’re targeting the hospital.
They think it was the local warlord.
My fiance was killed
on a mission to get Omar.
The same warlord who killed
your husband is now targeting you.
# Oh, I let my lover go
# Didn’t wanna be a liar
# Ashes in the cold
# Now I’m running toward the fire
# Runnin’ toward,
runnin’ toward the fire... #
Just keep being reminded of Elvis.